# Welcome to Kwyll

## What is Kwyll?

If you're new to Kwyll, a quick introduction to what it is, why it is,
and how it came about would probably be useful, so here goes.

Kwyll is, at it's core, a tool for creating retro-styled games for retro
platforms. What is "retro"? Well, in terms of Kwyll, it will initially
include anything that existed at the start of the home computer
revolution, so primarily 8-bit platforms, very low power, simple
capabilities, such as the Sinclair ZX Spectrum, Commodore 64, Amstrad
CPC, etc. It may extend beyond that in time, but that's the primary
target. In its current form, Kwyll only targets the Sinclair ZX Spectrum
(my personal favourite machine from the era).

That covers what it is, why it is, well that's a longer story, but I'll
try to keep it as short as I can. I've been involved with computers and
software development since I was 14 years old (1983!), and my first,
well actually second, my first was a ZX81, computer was a Sinclair ZX
Spectrum, the 16K version which I later upgraded to 48K myself when I
got the upgrade as a Christmas present from my parents. I've spent a
good portion of my career working in games, starting on the 8-bit
platforms of the time at Incentive Software. As such, these platforms
hold a great deal of nostalgia for me, memories of a time I've always
been very fond of. Fast forward to recent times, after a career working
in the software industry, with some very complex systems including
visual effects, VR, modern video games systems, FinTech etc. I found
myself drawn back to the early days, when things were simpler and more
fun, well, that's how I remember it anyway. A new wave of respect for
retro tech. in all shapes and forms seems to be taking hold, which only
added fuel to my desire to revisit those times. Then along comes the
"Spectrum Next" project on Kickstarter. Unfortunately, I missed the
first round, but definitely got in on the second. In anticipation of
it's arrival, I determined I was going to be making some
games like the good old days. I bought an Agon Light, a cheap Z80 based
open source system that had gained some popularity just about the right
time, and set to remembering how to program in Z80 again. While this was
fun, I soon realised that this was not what I wanted to do, I guess I'd
become too spoiled by modern tools and technologies. So, I decided the
best way to do what I wanted to do was to make a tool to do it. I'd
already gained some experience with this, being responsible for the 3D
Construction Kit at Incentive, and having worked on in-house tools at
various games companies in my career, I knew this was something I could
do and enjoy doing. And so Kwyll was born, as with all the best
projects, a means of scratching my own itch, that garnered some interest
from the community and grew into something else.

